---
layout: post
title: Excuse me, Do you have a minute to talk about GeoJSON?
tag: kml, shapefile, geojson, osm, spatial analysis, rgdal, spatial data, open file formats, Open Geospatial Consortium
---

The Shapefile is the most common file format for vector data in social sciences, but I am not very fan of it. Each Shapefile contains the information of only one layer and is composed by several files. If you are working with several layers, things become complicated:

> [The basic composition of a Shapefile is](http://resources.arcgis.com/en/help/main/10.2/index.html#//005600000003000000): `.shp` stores the feature geometry; `.shx` stores the index of the feature geometry; `.dbf` stores the dataset associated. Complementary files are composed by `.prj` (very important) stores the coordinate system information; `.xml` stores metadata; `.sbn`, `.sbx`, `.fbn`, and `.fbx` (spatial indexes); `.ain`, `.aih`, and `.atx`, (attribute indexes); `.ixs`, and `.mxs` (geocoding indexes).

It's too much.

When taking [Matt](http://mattingram.net/)'s course on Spatial Analysis, I came across `KML` and `GeoJSON`, and really liked them. `KML` and `GeoJSON` files are lighter than Shapefiles, and can store several layers within a single file. (Although `KML` seems to be even better,) `GeoJSON` became my preferred file format to store my spatial data.

`GeoJSON` is based on JSON, which is usually more efficient for storing data. [GeoJSON’s simplicity](http://www.macwright.org/2015/03/23/geojson-second-bite.html) makes it easy to use, read, and share. As said, you can store multpile layers (any type, points, lines and polygons) in just one file, as well as store a coordinate reference system. There are some nice tools in the web for working with GeoJSON: geojsonlit to validate your data in a map; ogre.adc4gis.com for transforming from GeoJSON to Shapefile or viceversa; geojson.io for editing your map’s features.

`KML` is an Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) standard data formatand is the standard file format to work with Google’s platforms (Google Earth, Google Maps, etc.). KML is restrained to a single projection standard (EPSG:4326), which makes things more simple when proyecting maps. Ah, and there is also the `OSM` file format (native for Open Street Maps). As GeoJSON and KML files, OSM can include multiple layers in one file.
