## Wilcoxon-Mann-White Test in R
### An Example

\textbf{Sample.} The overall group studied consists of managers from public and civil society organizations that were directly involved in the creation and coordination of the Technical Secretariat for Open Government of Jalisco (TSOGJ), in the state of Jalisco, Mexico. Participating in this study were 74 managers from state government offices, and 51 managers from CSO organizations (including profit, non-profit, and academic organizations). Managers were primarily departmental directors or directors that were the organizational link with the TSOGJ's coordination office. There was not sampling as all the organizations that joined the TSOGJ action plan were reached out. 

\textbf{Procedures.} A personalized link with an online questionnaire was sent to each manager from the initial sample by representatives of the TSOGJ, along with a memo describing the purposes of the research. The managers were required to individually respond the questionnaire on behalf of the organization's stand on diverse features of the open government initiative. The survey was administered between October 3th, and November 1st, 2017.

\textbf{Measures.} We established an analytic strategy focuses on two dimensions: a) Open Government, and b) Citizen Participation. The assessments related to \textit{Open Government} are: 1) level of development of open government values; 2) level of importance of open government, and 3) level of success of open government. The assessment related to \textit{Citizen Participation} are: 1) level of success of citizen participation, and 2) level of citizen participation in public affairs, according to "IAP2's Public Participation Spectrum"

Table \ref{tab:measures} presents these measurements. The level of development of open government values was evaluated with the question "In the following topics: What level of development do you think the Government of Jalisco is?", which had four variations: 1) access to information, 2) citizen participation, 3) accountability, and 4) use of new technologies and innovation. The response scale ranged from 1, not developed at all, to 7, totally developed.

To assess the level of importance of open government, we asked "How important do you think open government is for the Government of Jalisco?" The response scale ranged from 1, not important at all, to 7, totally important.

Two concepts measure level of success, in both open government and citizen participation. To measure the level of success, we asked "What is your perception about the success of implementing open government actions in the State of Jalisco?" and "What is your perception about the success of implementing citizen participation actions in the State of Jalisco?" In both cases, the response scale ranged from 1, not successful at all, to 7, totally successful.

Finally, according to the "IAP2's Public Participation Spectrum" a scale is established to know the level of citizen participation in public affairs, the scale is progressive in relation to the impact of citizen participation in public decision-making. The levels of participation established by the spectrum are: 1) There is no consultation or participation, 2) Inform: the government releases information of its actions. 3) Consult: civil society is able to give opinions and be heard by government bodies. 4) Involve: there is a feedback dialogue between civil society and government. 5) Collaborate: there is a permanent dialogue in all phases of public policies, such as problem definition, design, implementation and evaluation. 6) Empower: the government gives power to develop public policies to civil society.

\input{Tables/T_Measurements.tex}

\textbf{Analysis.} The sample of managers was divided based on the type of organization they belong two. We considered two groups: government, and CSO. The government group is composed by managers from State government departments and agencies, as well as municipalities in the State of Jalisco. The civil society group is composed by managers from universities, business companies, and non-profit organizations. The groups have sample size of: government $n=74$, and civil society $n=51$.

The means of all measurements presented above were compared among groups. The means were compared using  Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney (WMW) test for difference in means. The WMW test is preferred over the t-test for comparing the mean of two groups under data that is not paired (i.e. not before-after comparison) and not normally distributed. Under these circumstances, the WMW test has more power and efficiency than the t-test \cite{fay-Proschan2010}. The values for the group civil society are relatively normally distribution, whereas the values for the group government are highly skewed towards the highest scores.

A small value of the WMW test indicates that the mean difference among the groups is not statistically significant, whereas a WMW value above 105 indicates, with a 99\% confidence, that the means are different. We tested the difference of means with the t-test as a robustness check, obtaining the same conclusions than with the WMW test.

The difference of means test is followed by a \textit{Boxplot} analysis of the levels of importance and success of open government and citizen participation. The boxplot analysis aims to display the non-normal distribution in both groups and how this can affect the interpretation of the results. 

It is possible that the perception of importance and success of open government and citizen participation is influenced by the use of technological tools that the governments use to promote these two types of initiatives. Thus, by using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) we tested the perception of importance and success, controlling by the use of the technological tools described in Table \ref{tab:tools}. The two sets of dummy variables displayed in the Table \ref{tab:tools} were used as control variables for the Table \ref{fig:ols} in next section.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTk3ODYyNzQ4Ml19
-->